1

events

Definition 1.1 (sample space). The set of all possible outcomes of an experiment
is called the sample space and is denoted by Ω
Example 1.1. Head or Tails has sample space Ω = {𝐻, 𝑇 },
Definition 1.2 (Field). A field F is a subcollection of the collection of all subsets
of Ω.
F ⊆ {𝐴 : 𝐴 ⊆ Ω}
This subcollection needs to satisfy:
1. if 𝐴, 𝐵 ∈ F , then 𝐴 ∪ 𝐵 ∈ F and 𝐴 ∩ 𝐵 ∈ F
2. if 𝐴 ∈ F then 𝐴𝑐 ∈ F
3. the empty set ∅ belongs to F
It follows from the properties of a field F that
if 𝐴1 , 𝐴2 , . . . , 𝐴𝑛 ∈ F then

𝑛
Ø

𝐴𝑖 ∈ F

𝑖=1

We note that 𝜔 is notation used for a member of Ω.
Definition 1.3 (𝜎-field). A 𝜎-field is a collection of subsets of Ω that satisfies the
following conditions, in addition to those previously defined for fields in general.
1. ∅ ∈ F
2. if 𝐴1 , 𝐴2 , . . . ∈ F then

Ð∞

𝑖=1 𝐴𝑖 ∈ F

3. if 𝐴 ∈ F then 𝐴𝑐 ∈ F
notice that this actually just requires F to be closed under countable unions
Example 1.2. Take any 𝐴 ⊆ Ω, then {∅, 𝐴, 𝐴𝑐 , Ω} is a 𝜎-field
Example 1.3. the smallest 𝜎-field associated with Ω is the collection {∅, Ω}

1

Example 1.4. obviously the powerset, {0, 1}𝑛 is a 𝜎-field, but the book doesn’t
consider this relevant since probabilities cannot be reasonably assigned to all of
it’s members.
Recap 1.1. With any experiment, we may associate a pair (Ω, F ), where Ω is the
set of all possible outcomes or elementary events and F is a 𝜎-field of subsets of
Ω which contains all the events in whose occurences we may be interested in.
Exercises 1.
1. Let 𝐴 and 𝐵 belong to some 𝜎-field. Show that F constains
the sets 𝐴 ∩ 𝐵, and 𝐴 \ 𝐵, and 𝐴Δ𝐵.
Proof. let 𝐴 and 𝐶 belong to some 𝜎-field, by definition of a 𝜎-field,
trivially, 𝐴 ∩ 𝐵 ∈ F . Since 𝐵𝑐 ∈ F , then 𝐴 \ 𝐵 = 𝐴 ∩ 𝐵𝑐 ∈ F by closedness.
Symmetric difference is union of both sets minus their intersection let 𝐴 and
𝐵 belong to some 𝜎-field, by definition of a 𝜎-field, trivially, 𝐴 ∩ 𝐵 ∈ F .
Since 𝐵𝑐 ∈ F , then 𝐴\𝐵 = 𝐴∩𝐵𝑐 ∈ F by closedness. Symmetric difference
is union of both sets minus their intersection, which is in F trivially.
□
2. There will always be something

2

